{:title "Hello Cryogen!"
 :layout :post
 :tags  ["random"]}

### Thoughts on static site generator Cryogen:

So I finally got around to publish my blog. I figured that web presence is important and I need to have some sort of a site where I can share my projects and ideas. Wordpress usually is the goto for blog publishing and small web sites that don't require elaborate back-end. But even wordpress seems excessive sometimes, it does use SQL database after all. It seems a bit silly to me to use wordpress for this. These days we use frameworks and CMS for everything, even for one page websites, it feels like that we forgot how to make simple websites without them. Wordpress seems pretty heavy as well. One page website or a blog requires dozens of files, stylesheets, php files and a database. Crazy. It reminds me of one website I've stumbled upon that mocks this idea of excessiveness and over design. [Here it is, it's pretty hilarious.](http://motherfuckingwebsite.com)

Lately I've stumbled upon various static website generators. You don't need a DB and they take care of all pages for you nicely. One of the most popular ones is [Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com). Its written in Ruby and does the job well. It is also "blog-aware", which is a fancy way of saying that it does the heavy lifting for you of worrying about all the logic and interlinking between tags, posts, pages, etc. Pretty cool. Come to think of it, it's a very convenient way to build any other static website where you don't need much content updating. So they work well for small businesses as well. They run fast, let you host them pretty much anywhere, even [GitHub](http://github.com) for free! Another one is [Middleman](http://middlemanapp.com) generator, also written in Ruby and developed by [Thoughtbot](http://thoughtbot.com), company that is primarily Rails and iOS shop. It's very flexible, a bit more powerful than Jekyll and you can even use Ruby gems to extend functionality, plus it uses idiomatic Ruby a bit more heavily, so it's a very nice generator for Ruby developers who want to be productive without using heavy frameworks like Rails. 

This is where [Cryogen](http://cryogenweb.org) comes in. It's another site site generator but it's written in Clojure. It is much less known or used but Clojure is what makes it different. Interestingly enough you don't need to know any Clojure to get running. What I like about Cryogen is the fast setup and ease of use for publishing. The stock template is very basic and safe, in a way that it looks the way most websites look, nothing tricky about it. And it's a good thing because you need minimal effort to get going with customizing. You get to have the essentials: navigation, posts, link and tags. With other site generators you need to customize them a bit more, plus you need to dig into docs a bit deeper and Ruby as well. There are certainly advantages for using either of them. If I needed bare minimum setup for high customization then I'd choose Middleman, but for blogging Cryogen will do nicely. Some time ago I tried to list all the tags with Jekyll. I had to dig into the docs, it wasn't there so I had to write Ruby (or one of those templating languages) to list all tags on the page. It wasn't much of an issue but Cryogen give it to you for free as a default. Which makes sense because if it's "blog-aware" than most blogs list tags already for you.

With that said I find Cryogen to be nice little static generator for my purposes, to have a simple personal page with blog entries without spending too much time on customizing. This entry was not meant to be an overview of various site generators, it was more of a test post because I need to publish my blog already in the wild. I might look into all of those site generators much more closely in the future. I have to admit that the main reason I chose Cryogen was Clojure. I started to explore LISP languages and settled on Clojure. But Cryogen does what it does well so I am going to be sticking with it for now. 
